Skip to content
Anna Mathisen
Precision Paddling OC1 Program
Paddle Coaching
Life Coaching
About Anna
Paddling Tips & Updates

How to Fix 10 Common OC1 Endurance Training Mistakes
December 6, 2024

Once upon a time (pre-2010), my “endurance training” went like this:
Step 1: Start paddling.
Step 2: Increase effort until time or energy runs out.
Step 3: Finish tired and hungry, collapsing with bad posture.

Heart rate graph: climbs upwards like a staircase, sometimes reaching a peak heart rate.


But then, in 2010, my coach Janet changed my world by introducing me to non-stop, low-intensity paddling, and then my training went more like this:
Step 1: Start paddling and increase the effort until reaching 130 bpm heart rate.
Step 2: Keep heart rate steady between 125 and 135, backing off if it goes above 135.
Step 3: End workout at 130 bpm heart rate, feeling strong, fed and sitting up tall.







Heart rate graph shows a straight graph with little fluctuations.

Learning to keep my effort, and therefor heart rate low and steady—a flat, consistent line—transformed everything. I would recover quickly, and I could work hard in my next high-intensity or sprint interval session. Over time, I noticed I was finishing races feeling stronger at the end. As part of my overall plan, low-intensity training was effective and sustainable.


When I started coaching teams, it was my turn to help paddlers overcome mistakes and unlock the real benefits of endurance training. Seeing so many paddlers learning together at the same time gave me an expansive view of what mistakes can happen in endurance training and how to fix them.





Mistake #1: Believing that exhaustion is part of endurance.
At the first endurance workout with the team, the paddlers looked relaxed, but by the end of the session, their faces were turning red, and their breathing was labored. Instead of maintaining a steady pace, they pushed each other harder, speeding up the stroke rate at times and speeding it up even more at other times. They ended their endurance sessions exhausted.


As we circled around after practice, I had the unenviable job of explaining that by going out too hard, they sabotaged the adaptations they were aiming for.


This hardworking, committed group of athletes didn’t intend to sabotage their training. Like many athletes, they believed that all training was about exhaustion. But getting exhausted in endurance training is like cranking the stove too high and burning everything to a crisp.


The truth is that all training is about creating the conditions to make an adaptation. Some things are done better on a low simmer, and others are done better on a boil.


Fix: To train endurance, you need nonstop, low-intensity efforts without fatigue. If you finish your session tired, you worked too hard, or your session was longer than you were ready for. Hard interval and low-intensity endurance sessions are kept separate because they target different energy systems. Endurance training is different because it barely produces any lactate. This is low-cost and easy to recover from, whereas intensity produces lactate and strains your muscles, which is costly for fatigue and recovery.

Mistake #2: Paddling for longer than you can hold your best technique.
Mistake #3: Not having a goal in mind.
Mistake #4: Allowing yourself to be pushed by others.
Mistake #5: Not having a steady tempo or cadence.
Paddlers sometimes start at a cadence they cannot maintain for the entire workout and gradually slow it down. This teaches your body to slow down throughout the session rather than to maintain a pace throughout the duration.

Fix: Use a metronome as a training partner. Start at the tempo you can finish with. You’ll keep a perfectly steady pace, and you won’t have to worry about your cadence slowing down, which is excellent for conditioning.

Mistake #6: Not being able to see your heart rate while paddling.
Mistake #7: Using preset heart rate zones to determine your effort level.
Mistake #8: Paddling upwind or downwind during endurance training.
Mistake #9: Not training endurance because you are training for a sprint, such as a 500-meter race.
Mistake #10: Not fueling.
These mistakes are common, and most people, myself included, make at least a couple of them. However, the benefits of correcting them are incredible! It takes discipline to keep the intensity low, but it’s worth it to get these adaptations and to save yourself for hard intervals, which cost a lot in terms of recovery time, energy used, and risk of injury.

A well-rounded training program includes technique training, intervals for speed and power, and training to build endurance.  Developing your endurance aerobic system is the base that prepares you to finish races and time trials feeling strong and keeps you healthy and able to participate for years to come.

Back to Paddling Tips & Updates
Upcoming Events
Sign up for Paddling Tips & Updates Newsletter!

Click below to sign up for paddle coaching tips, announcements, and training opportunities.
SIGNUP FOR TIPS AND UPDATES

About Anna
Precision Paddling Program
Paddle Coaching
Life Coaching
Contact
Hawaii Camps
Individualized Training
Workshops
Inspiring Stories
Paddling Tips & Updates
Privacy Policy
© 2025 Anna Mathisen
Precision Paddling OC1 Program
Paddle Coaching
Life Coaching
About Anna
Paddling Tips & Updates
